Factor 0.75:
------------

The SO_OOBINLINE socket flag is now set. In 0.74, sending out-of-band
data could fill up the buffer and cause a denial-of-service attack.

The alien interface now supports "float" and "double" types.

Factor 0.74:
------------

C library interface ported to Linux/PPC and Mac OS X.

Developer's handbook rewritten to be more up to date and complete.

Added the sequences vocabulary that unifies code for working with lists,
vectors, strings, and string buffers. There are many changes, and most
of the old type-specific words such as vector-nth and string-map are
gone.

Added the matrices vocabulary for working with mathematical vectors and
matrices.

Added two words for modular arithmetic in the math vocabulary: mod-inv
and ^mod.

Added HTTP client API supporting GET and POST requests in the
http-client vocabulary.

Removed some inspection words: vocabs. words. usages. Now, just put a
space before the . and write vocabs . words . usages .

Redefining words that are used by compiled words automatically
decompiles the compiled words. This fixes the problem of new definitions
not taking effect. In a future release, there will be automatic
recompilation, rather than decompilation.

As a result of the previous change, there is now a cross-referencing
database, and the usages word lists indirect dependencies and is much
faster. The usage word behaves like the old usages, and lists direct
dependencies only.

The dump word in the dump vocabulary prints the memory bytes comprising
an object. The dump* word prints the bytes at an arbitrary address.

New words in words vocabulary for inspecting classes and methods:
classes implements.

The Unix I/O code was rewritten in Factor using the C library interface.
Many new features will be added in future releases, such as socket
timeouts and Unicode character encodings.

Lazy lists and parser combinators library in contrib/parser-combinators/
(Chris Double).

Quotations containing \ foo are prettyprinted in that form.

The watch word now causes annotated words to dump the stack, in addition
to printing a log message.
